Documentation/bpf/kfuncs.rst, before:

=============================
BPF Kernel Functions (kfuncs)
=============================

1. Introduction
===============

BPF Kernel Functions or more commonly known as kfuncs are functions in the Linux
kernel which are exposed for use by BPF programs. Unlike normal BPF helpers,
kfuncs do not have a stable interface and can change from one kernel release to
another. Hence, BPF programs need to be updated in response to changes in the
kernel.

2. Defining a kfunc
===================

There are two ways to expose a kernel function to BPF programs, either make an
existing function in the kernel visible, or add a new wrapper for BPF. In both
cases, care must be taken that BPF program can only call such function in a
valid context. To enforce this, visibility of a kfunc can be per program type.

If you are not creating a BPF wrapper for existing kernel function, skip ahead
to :ref:`BPF_kfunc_nodef`.

2.1 Creating a wrapper kfunc
----------------------------

When defining a wrapper kfunc, the wrapper function should have extern linkage.
This prevents the compiler from optimizing away dead code, as this wrapper kfunc
is not invoked anywhere in the kernel itself. It is not necessary to provide a
prototype in a header for the wrapper kfunc.

An example is given below::

        /* Disables missing prototype warnings */
        __diag_push();
        __diag_ignore_all("-Wmissing-prototypes",
                          "Global kfuncs as their definitions will be in BTF");

        struct task_struct *bpf_find_get_task_by_vpid(pid_t nr)
        {
                return find_get_task_by_vpid(nr);
        }

        __diag_pop();

A wrapper kfunc is often needed when we need to annotate parameters of the
kfunc. Otherwise one may directly make the kfunc visible to the BPF program by
registering it with the BPF subsystem. See :ref:`BPF_kfunc_nodef`.

2.2 Annotating kfunc parameters
-------------------------------

Similar to BPF helpers, there is sometime need for additional context required
by the verifier to make the usage of kernel functions safer and more useful.
Hence, we can annotate a parameter by suffixing the name of the argument of the
kfunc with a __tag, where tag may be one of the supported annotations.

2.2.1 __sz Annotation
---------------------

This annotation is used to indicate a memory and size pair in the argument list.
An example is given below::

        void bpf_memzero(void *mem, int mem__sz)
        {
        ...
        }

Here, the verifier will treat first argument as a PTR_TO_MEM, and second
argument as its size. By default, without __sz annotation, the size of the type
of the pointer is used. Without __sz annotation, a kfunc cannot accept a void
pointer.

.. _BPF_kfunc_nodef:

2.3 Using an existing kernel function
-------------------------------------

When an existing function in the kernel is fit for consumption by BPF programs,
it can be directly registered with the BPF subsystem. However, care must still
be taken to review the context in which it will be invoked by the BPF program
and whether it is safe to do so.

2.4 Annotating kfuncs
---------------------

In addition to kfuncs' arguments, verifier may need more information about the
type of kfunc(s) being registered with the BPF subsystem. To do so, we define
flags on a set of kfuncs as follows::

        BTF_SET8_START(bpf_task_set)
        BTF_ID_FLAGS(func, bpf_get_task_pid, KF_ACQUIRE | KF_RET_NULL)
        BTF_ID_FLAGS(func, bpf_put_pid, KF_RELEASE)
        BTF_SET8_END(bpf_task_set)

This set encodes the BTF ID of each kfunc listed above, and encodes the flags
along with it. Ofcourse, it is also allowed to specify no flags.

2.4.1 KF_ACQUIRE flag
---------------------

The KF_ACQUIRE flag is used to indicate that the kfunc returns a pointer to a
refcounted object. The verifier will then ensure that the pointer to the object
is eventually released using a release kfunc, or transferred to a map using a
referenced kptr (by invoking bpf_kptr_xchg). If not, the verifier fails the
loading of the BPF program until no lingering references remain in all possible
explored states of the program.

2.4.2 KF_RET_NULL flag
----------------------

The KF_RET_NULL flag is used to indicate that the pointer returned by the kfunc
may be NULL. Hence, it forces the user to do a NULL check on the pointer
returned from the kfunc before making use of it (dereferencing or passing to
another helper). This flag is often used in pairing with KF_ACQUIRE flag, but
both are orthogonal to each other.

2.4.3 KF_RELEASE flag
---------------------

The KF_RELEASE flag is used to indicate that the kfunc releases the pointer
passed in to it. There can be only one referenced pointer that can be passed in.
All copies of the pointer being released are invalidated as a result of invoking
kfunc with this flag.

2.4.4 KF_KPTR_GET flag
----------------------

The KF_KPTR_GET flag is used to indicate that the kfunc takes the first argument
as a pointer to kptr, safely increments the refcount of the object it points to,
and returns a reference to the user. The rest of the arguments may be normal
arguments of a kfunc. The KF_KPTR_GET flag should be used in conjunction with
KF_ACQUIRE and KF_RET_NULL flags.

2.4.5 KF_TRUSTED_ARGS flag
--------------------------

The KF_TRUSTED_ARGS flag is used for kfuncs taking pointer arguments. It
indicates that the all pointer arguments will always be refcounted, and have
their offset set to 0. It can be used to enforce that a pointer to a refcounted
object acquired from a kfunc or BPF helper is passed as an argument to this
kfunc without any modifications (e.g. pointer arithmetic) such that it is
trusted and points to the original object. This flag is often used for kfuncs
that operate (change some property, perform some operation) on an object that
was obtained using an acquire kfunc. Such kfuncs need an unchanged pointer to
ensure the integrity of the operation being performed on the expected object.

2.4.6 KF_SLEEPABLE flag
-----------------------

The KF_SLEEPABLE flag is used for kfuncs that may sleep. Such kfuncs can only
be called by sleepable BPF programs (BPF_F_SLEEPABLE).

2.4.7 KF_DESTRUCTIVE flag
--------------------------

The KF_DESTRUCTIVE flag is used to indicate functions calling which is
destructive to the system. For example such a call can result in system
rebooting or panicking. Due to this additional restrictions apply to these
calls. At the moment they only require CAP_SYS_BOOT capability, but more can be
added later.

2.5 Registering the kfuncs
--------------------------

Once the kfunc is prepared for use, the final step to making it visible is
registering it with the BPF subsystem. Registration is done per BPF program
type. An example is shown below::

        BTF_SET8_START(bpf_task_set)
        BTF_ID_FLAGS(func, bpf_get_task_pid, KF_ACQUIRE | KF_RET_NULL)
        BTF_ID_FLAGS(func, bpf_put_pid, KF_RELEASE)
        BTF_SET8_END(bpf_task_set)

        static const struct btf_kfunc_id_set bpf_task_kfunc_set = {
                .owner = THIS_MODULE,
                .set   = &bpf_task_set,
        };

        static int init_subsystem(void)
        {
                return register_btf_kfunc_id_set(BPF_PROG_TYPE_TRACING, &bpf_task_kfunc_set);
        }
        late_initcall(init_subsystem);

Commit message:

bpf: Support constant scalar arguments for kfuncs
Allow passing known constant scalars as arguments to kfuncs that do not
represent a size parameter. This makes the search pruning optimization
of verifier more conservative for such kfunc calls, and each
non-distinct argument is considered unequivalent.

We will use this support to then expose a global bpf_kptr_alloc function
where it takes the local type ID in program BTF, and returns a
PTR_TO_BTF_ID to the local type. These will be called local kptrs, and
allows programs to allocate their own objects.

However, this is still not completely safe, as mark_chain_precision
logic is buggy without more work when the constant argument is not a
size, but still needs precise marker propagation for pruning checks.
Next patch will fix this problem.

Signed-off-by: Kumar Kartikeya Dwivedi <memxor@gmail.com>

Documentation/bpf/kfuncs.rst, after:

=============================
BPF Kernel Functions (kfuncs)
=============================

1. Introduction
===============

BPF Kernel Functions or more commonly known as kfuncs are functions in the Linux
kernel which are exposed for use by BPF programs. Unlike normal BPF helpers,
kfuncs do not have a stable interface and can change from one kernel release to
another. Hence, BPF programs need to be updated in response to changes in the
kernel.

2. Defining a kfunc
===================

There are two ways to expose a kernel function to BPF programs, either make an
existing function in the kernel visible, or add a new wrapper for BPF. In both
cases, care must be taken that BPF program can only call such function in a
valid context. To enforce this, visibility of a kfunc can be per program type.

If you are not creating a BPF wrapper for existing kernel function, skip ahead
to :ref:`BPF_kfunc_nodef`.

2.1 Creating a wrapper kfunc
----------------------------

When defining a wrapper kfunc, the wrapper function should have extern linkage.
This prevents the compiler from optimizing away dead code, as this wrapper kfunc
is not invoked anywhere in the kernel itself. It is not necessary to provide a
prototype in a header for the wrapper kfunc.

An example is given below::

        /* Disables missing prototype warnings */
        __diag_push();
        __diag_ignore_all("-Wmissing-prototypes",
                          "Global kfuncs as their definitions will be in BTF");

        struct task_struct *bpf_find_get_task_by_vpid(pid_t nr)
        {
                return find_get_task_by_vpid(nr);
        }

        __diag_pop();

A wrapper kfunc is often needed when we need to annotate parameters of the
kfunc. Otherwise one may directly make the kfunc visible to the BPF program by
registering it with the BPF subsystem. See :ref:`BPF_kfunc_nodef`.

2.2 Annotating kfunc parameters
-------------------------------

Similar to BPF helpers, there is sometime need for additional context required
by the verifier to make the usage of kernel functions safer and more useful.
Hence, we can annotate a parameter by suffixing the name of the argument of the
kfunc with a __tag, where tag may be one of the supported annotations.

2.2.1 __sz Annotation
---------------------

This annotation is used to indicate a memory and size pair in the argument list.
An example is given below::

        void bpf_memzero(void *mem, int mem__sz)
        {
        ...
        }

Here, the verifier will treat first argument as a PTR_TO_MEM, and second
argument as its size. By default, without __sz annotation, the size of the type
of the pointer is used. Without __sz annotation, a kfunc cannot accept a void
pointer.

2.2.1 __k Annotation
--------------------

This annotation is only understood for scalar arguments, where it indicates that
the verifier must check the scalar argument to be a known constant, which does
not indicate a size parameter. This distinction is important, as when the scalar
argument does not represent a size parameter, verifier is more conservative in
state search pruning and does not consider two arguments equivalent for safety
purposes if the already verified value was within range of the new one.

This assumption holds well for sizes (as memory accessed within smaller bounds
in old verified state will also work for bigger bounds in current to be explored
state), but not for other constant arguments where each carries a distinct
semantic effect.

An example is given below::

        void *bpf_mem_alloc(u32 local_type_id__k)
        {
        ...
        }

Here, bpf_mem_alloc uses local_type_id argument to find out the size of that
type ID in program's BTF and return a sized pointer to it. Each type ID will
have a distinct size, hence it is crucial to treat each such call as distinct
when values don't match.

Hence, whenever a constant scalar argument is accepted by a kfunc which is not a
size parameter, __k suffix must be used.

.. _BPF_kfunc_nodef:

2.3 Using an existing kernel function
-------------------------------------

When an existing function in the kernel is fit for consumption by BPF programs,
it can be directly registered with the BPF subsystem. However, care must still
be taken to review the context in which it will be invoked by the BPF program
and whether it is safe to do so.

2.4 Annotating kfuncs
---------------------

In addition to kfuncs' arguments, verifier may need more information about the
type of kfunc(s) being registered with the BPF subsystem. To do so, we define
flags on a set of kfuncs as follows::

        BTF_SET8_START(bpf_task_set)
        BTF_ID_FLAGS(func, bpf_get_task_pid, KF_ACQUIRE | KF_RET_NULL)
        BTF_ID_FLAGS(func, bpf_put_pid, KF_RELEASE)
        BTF_SET8_END(bpf_task_set)

This set encodes the BTF ID of each kfunc listed above, and encodes the flags
along with it. Ofcourse, it is also allowed to specify no flags.

2.4.1 KF_ACQUIRE flag
---------------------

The KF_ACQUIRE flag is used to indicate that the kfunc returns a pointer to a
refcounted object. The verifier will then ensure that the pointer to the object
is eventually released using a release kfunc, or transferred to a map using a
referenced kptr (by invoking bpf_kptr_xchg). If not, the verifier fails the
loading of the BPF program until no lingering references remain in all possible
explored states of the program.

2.4.2 KF_RET_NULL flag
----------------------

The KF_RET_NULL flag is used to indicate that the pointer returned by the kfunc
may be NULL. Hence, it forces the user to do a NULL check on the pointer
returned from the kfunc before making use of it (dereferencing or passing to
another helper). This flag is often used in pairing with KF_ACQUIRE flag, but
both are orthogonal to each other.

2.4.3 KF_RELEASE flag
---------------------

The KF_RELEASE flag is used to indicate that the kfunc releases the pointer
passed in to it. There can be only one referenced pointer that can be passed in.
All copies of the pointer being released are invalidated as a result of invoking
kfunc with this flag.

2.4.4 KF_KPTR_GET flag
----------------------

The KF_KPTR_GET flag is used to indicate that the kfunc takes the first argument
as a pointer to kptr, safely increments the refcount of the object it points to,
and returns a reference to the user. The rest of the arguments may be normal
arguments of a kfunc. The KF_KPTR_GET flag should be used in conjunction with
KF_ACQUIRE and KF_RET_NULL flags.

2.4.5 KF_TRUSTED_ARGS flag
--------------------------

The KF_TRUSTED_ARGS flag is used for kfuncs taking pointer arguments. It
indicates that the all pointer arguments will always be refcounted, and have
their offset set to 0. It can be used to enforce that a pointer to a refcounted
object acquired from a kfunc or BPF helper is passed as an argument to this
kfunc without any modifications (e.g. pointer arithmetic) such that it is
trusted and points to the original object. This flag is often used for kfuncs
that operate (change some property, perform some operation) on an object that
was obtained using an acquire kfunc. Such kfuncs need an unchanged pointer to
ensure the integrity of the operation being performed on the expected object.

2.4.6 KF_SLEEPABLE flag
-----------------------

The KF_SLEEPABLE flag is used for kfuncs that may sleep. Such kfuncs can only
be called by sleepable BPF programs (BPF_F_SLEEPABLE).

2.4.7 KF_DESTRUCTIVE flag
--------------------------

The KF_DESTRUCTIVE flag is used to indicate functions calling which is
destructive to the system. For example such a call can result in system
rebooting or panicking. Due to this additional restrictions apply to these
calls. At the moment they only require CAP_SYS_BOOT capability, but more can be
added later.

2.5 Registering the kfuncs
--------------------------

Once the kfunc is prepared for use, the final step to making it visible is
registering it with the BPF subsystem. Registration is done per BPF program
type. An example is shown below::

        BTF_SET8_START(bpf_task_set)
        BTF_ID_FLAGS(func, bpf_get_task_pid, KF_ACQUIRE | KF_RET_NULL)
        BTF_ID_FLAGS(func, bpf_put_pid, KF_RELEASE)
        BTF_SET8_END(bpf_task_set)

        static const struct btf_kfunc_id_set bpf_task_kfunc_set = {
                .owner = THIS_MODULE,
                .set   = &bpf_task_set,
        };

        static int init_subsystem(void)
        {
                return register_btf_kfunc_id_set(BPF_PROG_TYPE_TRACING, &bpf_task_kfunc_set);
        }
        late_initcall(init_subsystem);
